We now turn our attention to a very interesting
and important class of graphs called Directed
Acyclic Graphs or DAGs.
So, to motivate this class of graphs, let
us look at a problem where we have a bunch
of tasks to perform with some constraints.
Suppose, we are going on a foreign trip, then
of course, we need a passport, we need to
buy a ticket, we require a visa probably,
we want to buy some travel insurance, we probably
need some foreign exchange as well and perhaps
you want to buy some gifts for our hosts.
Now, these tasks are dependent on each other
in certain ways, without a passport you cannot
buy a ticket, not even buy any travel insurance.
For the visa, you need both the ticket and
the insurance to be available and without
a visa, the bank will not give you foreign
exchange. And finally, you would not like
to buy gifts for your hosts, unless the trip
is confirmed. So, unless you have all these
things including the visa in hand, you do
not want to invest in the gift.
So, our goal is that given these constraints
in what sequence should we perform these six
operations, getting a passport, buying a ticket,
getting insurance, getting a visa, buying
foreign exchange and buying gifts for our
hosts. What sequence should we do it, so that
whenever we want to approach a task, the constraints
that are required for the task are satisfied.
So, as you would expect we will model this
using a graph. In this graph, the vertices
will be the tasks and then you will have an
edge pointing from T 1 to T 2, if T 1 must
come before T 2, in other words T 2 depends
on T 1 you cannot do T 2 unless T 1 has been
completed. So, as an example getting a passport
must come before buying a ticket, so if T
1 is getting a passport, T 2 could be getting
a ticket. Similarly, you must buy a, have
a visa before you buy foreign exchange. So,
there will be an edge from getting a visa
to buying foreign exchange.
So, if we look at the constraints that we
wrote this is the graph that we had, so we
had a constraints with says we need a passport
to buy a ticket, we need a passport to buy
insurance, we need both a ticket and insurance
to get a visa. So, there are two constraints
pointing to visa. Then, you need a visa to
buy foreign exchange and finally, we said
we will buy a gift only if the trip is confirmed
and at some point at this stage when all these
operations are done, we can assume that the
trip is confirmed, because nothing is blocking
us getting on the plane.
So, this is a graph that we have and now our
goal is to sequence these six operations,
in such a way that whenever we want to perform
a task, whatever it depends on has already
been done. So, we can see that you need a
passport to do anything, so we always need
to start with getting a password. Now, there
is no dependency between buying a ticket and
buying insurance as per the constraints we
have, so far. So, after password you can either
buy a ticket first and then buy insurance
or you can buy insurance first and then buy
a ticket.
So, there is a different ordering possible
which does not violate the constraints, on
the other hand for a visa we need both. So,
visa must come after both ticket and insurance,
but again having done the visa, then there
is no constraint between buying the foreign
exchange and buying gifts. So, you could do
the foreign exchange before the gift or the
gift before the foreign exchange, so there
are, in this particular example there are
two possible ways of reordering the ticket
and the insurance and there are two possible
ways of reordering the gifts and the foreign
exchange. So, overall there are four different
sequences which are compatible with these
constraints.
So, this class of graph is an important class
and it has two important features, one is
of course, it is directed. Because, these
dependencies are from one task to another
task, it is not a symmetric dependency and
there are no cycles. See, if you had a cycle
it would been that group of tasks depend on
each other, so there is no way to start, because
each task depends on something else in the
cycle. So, you have to break the cycle somewhere
in order to get started, but you cannot break
it anywhere, because each task depends on
something else in the cycle. So, this graph
will have directions on the edges and there
cannot be any cycles in this graph.
So, we call such a graph a directed acyclic
graph, so a directed acyclic graph is just
a directed graph, in which there is no directed
path from any vertex back to itself. So, if
I started any vertex V, it should not be the
case that I can follow a sequence of directed
edges in the same direction and somehow come
back to v. So, this should not be there, so
there should not be this cycle, we abbreviate
the name Directed Acyclic Graph as DAG.. So,
very often for simplicity we will call these
graphs DAGs.
So, the problem that we had adressed in our
example is that we are given a set of tasks
and we want to write them out in a sequence
which respects the constraints, the constraints
are nothing but, the edges. So, in general
we are given a set of vertices these are our
tasks abstractly 1 to n and we want to write
out 1 to n in such a way that the constraints
are respected. What this means is, that we
will write out a sequence of numbers which
is a permutation of 1 to n. In such a way
that whenever there is a constraint of the
form j k that is there is an edge j k, then
in the enumeration that we have performed
j must come before k. So, it cannot be that
we have to do j before k according to our
constraint, but in the sequence that we produce
k happens before j. So, the order of vertices
in the final sequence must respect the constraints
given by the DAG, so for various reasons this
is known as topologically sorting the DAG.
So, the first observation is that if the directed
graph had a cycle, then you will not be able
to topologically order it. Because, if it
had a cycle then for instance supposing j
and k are vertices on the cycle, then you
will have a path from j to k and a path from
k to j. Now, it is easy to see that the topological
ordering constraint extends to paths that
is if I have j before k as an edge, I know
that j must appear before k in the final sequence,
also if it has the path from j to k, then
there is a sequence of dependencies from j
to k. So, j must appear before k.
Now, if I have a cycle it says that j must
come before k and k must come before j. So,
there is no way to break this dichotomy, so
we will end up with a situation where we cannot
order this set of tasks to respect the constraints.
So, if the graph has cycles, then it is clear
that there is no topological ordering possible.
So, what we claim; however, is that for DAGs
that is if there is no cycle, the graph is
actually acyclic then we can always order
it topologically. So, the strategy is to order
the vertices as follows, you first list all
the vertices which have no dependencies. In
our earlier example, the vertex which had
no dependencies was getting a passport, we
did not need to do anything before getting
a passport, so we can do that first.
Now, once we have knocked off the dependency
you see any vertex from which all its dependencies
are now satisfied and then we can enumerate
that. So, we can systematically list out vertices
with no incoming edges, then vertices all
of whose incoming edges have already been
accounted for in our enumeration and so on.
So, to formalize this notion we introduce
some terminology, so recall that for an undirected
graph, we use the term degree of v to refer
to the number of vertices connected to v.
So, if v was connected by an edge to 4 vertices,
then we would say that the degree of v is
4. Now, since we have a directed graph we
have directions on the edges, we have some
edges which are coming in and some edges which
are going out. So, we separate out the degree
in to the indegree and the outdegree. So,
the indegree is the number of edges pointing
into v directed into v, the outdegree of v
is a number of edges pointing out of v.
So, our first claim is that every DAG has
at least one vertex with indegree 0, in terms
of our example a vertex with indegree 0 is
something which has no dependencies, nothing
it does not depend on anything, there is nothing
pointing into it. Now, how do we prove this.
Now supposing we start with any vertex v such
that it has indegree greater than 0, since
it has something pointing into it, then it
must have some edge coming into it, so let
us call that v 2.
Now, supposing this does not have indegree
0, then it must also have something pointing
into it. So, then I get a third vertex, so
in this way if I keep finding that the vertices
I am encountering have indegree greater than
0, eventually I must enumerate all the vertices
in my graph. Now, if there is still not the
case that the nth vertex, there are n vertices,
the nth vertex still does not have indegree
0 then it must have an incoming edge, but
that cannot be from a new vertex. So, it must
point from one of the existing vertices which
I have already seen before.
So, therefore, if I have a continuous sequence
of vertices all of which are pointing to the
previous one with indegree not equal to 0,
then I will end up with a cycle, but this
is a contradiction, because we have an acyclic
graph. So, in any directed acyclic graph,
there must be at least one vertex with indegree
0 which corresponds to a task with no dependencies
from where we can start our enumeration of
the tasks.
So, this is a more elaborate version of the
algorithm that we described earlier. So, we
pick a vertex with indegree 0, we call that
such a vertex has no dependencies, now we
enumerate it because it now has, it is available
for enumeration and then we delete it from
the graph. So, when we delete a vertex with
indegree 0 from a graph so supposing we have
a DAG like this. So, supposing we pick this
one and we delete it, then clearly what remains
is a DAG.
Because, it is still directed and we have
not introduced any cycle, so it was already
acyclic and by deleting an edge we cannot
introduce a cycle. So, clearly it is a DAG,
so we can apply the same criterion, this new
DAG must also have at least one degree with...
vertex with indegree 0. So, we can enumerate
that and keep going, so we keep enumerating
vertices with indegree 0 untill the DAG becomes
empty, each vertex we enumerate we will delete
from the DAG.
So, let us apply the strategy to this DAG,
so we first begin by labelling every vertex
by its in degree. So, in red we have indicated
the in degree of every vertex. So, for instance
1 and 2 have no incoming edges. So, they have
indegree 0, vertex 3 has 2 edges coming in
so it has indegree 2, vertex 8 has 4 edges
coming in so it has indegree 4 and so on,
now we have to pick a vertex of indegree 0
enumerate it and eliminate it.
So, we have a choice between 1 and 2, so let
us suppose we start with 1, so we start with
1 we eliminate it and now when we eliminate
it we also eliminate the edges going out of
it. So, the edges coming into 3, 4 and 5 will
reduce by 1, because the vertex 1 is gone,
so the edges coming into them reduce by 1
their indegrees also reduce by 1.
So, what happens when we eliminate 1 is that
we enumerate it and we reduce the indegrees
of 3, 4 and 5 from 2, 1 1 to 1 0 0.
So, recall that before that the indegrees
were 2 1 and 1, now these edges which are
coming into them have been deleted. So, when
we delete this, we also delete the incoming
edges.
So, now we have 1 0 0, now we have three choices,
the original one which had indegree 0 and
we have two new vertices 4 and 5 which correspond
to tasks if you want to call them, whose prerequisites
have been completed. So, tasks 1 was the only
prerequisite for 4, task 1 was the only prerequisite
for 5 it has been completed. So, 4 and 5 are
now available, so we can choose any of 2,
4 and 5 it does not matter. So, let us suppose
we choose 4 then again these two edges will
go. So, this will reduce to 1 and this will
reduce to 3.
So, we can do that eliminate 4 and reduce
the indegree of 6 from 2 to 1 in degree of
8 from 4 to 3, now perhaps we decide to eliminate
task 2.
So, when you do task 2 then the indegree of
3 reduces and the indegree of 8 again reduces.
So, notice that 8 still has two pending requirements
namely 5 and 7, so it cannot be done yet,
but 3 and 5 are available.
So, perhaps I do 5, so now 8 has 1 and now
have no choice, the only task with indegree
0 is 3. So, then I do 3, so now I can see
that this is actually the way it is drawn
is that is the sequence, I must do 3 before
6, 6 before 7, 7 before 8. So, I no choice
at this point I must enumerate it as 3.
Then, 6.
Then, 7.
Then finally, 8.
At this point my graph is empty and I have
obtained a sequence of vertices which is a
valid topological ordering, because every
pair of vertices which occur as an edge in
my original graph is ordered, so that source
of the edge appears before the target of the
edge.
So, let us look at some pseudo code for the
algorithm which we just executed by hand.
So, in this particular algorithm we first
start by computing the indegree, so in order
to compute the indegree, we need to find out
how many for a vertex i we need to find out
how many j satisfy the property that A j i
is equal to 1, because this corresponds to
an edge from j to i. So, in an adjacency matrix
this corresponds to looking at the column
containing i.
Because, in the column containing i, we will
have entries of the form A 1 i, A 2 i and
so on. So, we will have these entries and
we want to scan all of these and then add
up all the 1s. So, we start by setting indegree
equal to 1, indegree i equal to 0 and then
for every row j we add A j i. So, it is either
0 or 1 and so we therefore, collect all the
incoming edges which are pointing to i as
the in degree of i, now we start enumerating.
So, we know this is a DAG, so we know there
is at least one j with indegree 0 at every
point.
So, we choose any such j, choose a j which
has indegree 0 enumerate it, now when we enumerate
we want to eliminate it from the graph. Rather
than, going and actually modifying the graph
itself, we will just work with indegree as
a kind of approximate version of the modified
graph. So, we first set the indegree to minus
1 for this particular vertex. So, minus 1
means it cannot be in the graph, because you
cannot have minus 1 edges pointing you can
have at least 0 edges or more.
So, this effectively means that j is not going
to be considered henceforth and now for every
outgoing edge from j. So, wherever we have
j pointing to k we want to decrement this,
because we are going to eliminate this edge
by eliminating j, we eliminate this edge.
So, for every k from 1 to n we scan all the
outgoing neighbours of j and if j k is an
edge A j k is 1 we reduce the indegree of
k by 1.
So, what is the complexity of the algorithm
it is fairly easy to see that for this adjacency
matrix representation it is n square, as we
saw initializing the indegree itself takes
time n square, right. Because, we have an
outer loop from 1 to n and then for each outer
loop we have an inner loop from 1 to n, so
this is an n squared loop. And then, when
we enumerate the vertices again we have an
outer loop which will enumerate every vertex
once.
And then for the inner loop, we have to enumerate
check all it is neighbours and decrement.
So, we have 2 n square loops and therefore,
this whole thing takes order n square.
Now, we can as we saw with BFS and DFS, if
we use an adjacency list we can be a little
more clever and we can bring down this time
to linear from n square we can bring it down
to order n plus m. So, how do we do this?
Well, we be have this list, so we have list
say 1, 2 and for each of these we have a list
of its neighbours. So, if you go through this
as we said each edge in this, now this is
a directed graph. So, each edges is represented
only once if there is an edge from i to j
it will appear as an entry j in the list for
i.
So, if you scan these lists every time we
see a j, we know there is an edge pointing
into j and we will increment. So, we start
of by setting all the indegrees to 0, we scan
all the lists and every time we see an entry
in a list, we increment its indegree. So,
in one scan of the list that is in time order
m, we can find the indegrees. Now, we have
the list of indegrees, so we can put all the
indegree vertices into a queue, this makes
it easy to find which vertex to enumerate
next.
So, at the end of this scan we have done an
order m scan to find all the indegrees, now
and in an order n scan we can put all the
0 degree vertices in to a queue. Now, we can
do the rest pretty much as we did much before,
we enumerate the first vertex in the queue
and then we go to its list which is now explicitly
available to us in this adjacency list its
outgoing neighbours, decrement its indegree
and if any of those indegrees become 0 we
can add it to the queue.
So, we know it is to be processed now, so
this becomes overall it takes order m time
to scan the list it takes order n time to
start the queue of and then this is a loop
of order n where across all the updates we
will overall update indegrees order m times,
so this is order n plus m.
So, here is the corresponding pseudo code,
so the first step is to initialise the in
degree to 0 for every vertex in our graph,
then we go through all the edges. So, we do
this by looking at each adjacency list. For
each vertex we look at each neighbour i, j
and the adjacency list and for each of these
we increment the indegree of j, because we
are looking at edges pointing into j, not
pointing out of i. So, this pointing into
j will come in different list.
But, as and when we encounter them for each
of them we will account for them and add one
to it. Now, we go through the list one more
time the list of vertices and every time will
see an indegree 0 we add i to the queue. And
now we do this loop, till the queue becomes
empty we know there is at least one at every
point remember as long as the graph the DAG
is not an empty, we know there is at least
one indegree vertex with indegree 0. So, it
must be in the queue, because we adding them
all initially to the queue and each one we
generate we will add to the queue.
So, as long as the queue is not empty we take
of the first element of the queue, then we
look at its adjacency list, decrement the
indegrees of all those vertices and if any
of them happens to now become indegree 0,
we add it to the queue. So, this becomes now
a linear implementation of topological sort,
using adjacency list and a queue to process
the elements. Because, the reason why we need
this queue is that otherwise we have to scan
all the vertices every time to determine whether
a vertex has become indegree 0, then that
becomes an order n scan within this so it
becomes order n square again.
So, we need the queue to make sure that we
do not spend time trying to identify the next
vertex to enumerate. We do not have to go
through all the vertices and check the indegrees,
when we see the indegree 0 we put it into
the queue. So, automatically it will come
out without having to do any further check.
So, it gets observed in this order m work
that we are doing here.